Implicit tiling spec (#444)
CesiumGS/3d-tiles: extensions/3DTILES_implicit_tiling/0.0.0/README.md

| `geometricError` | Each child's `geometricError` is half of the parent's `geometricError` |

## Tile Coordinates

>**Tile coordinates** are a tuple of integers that uniquely identify a tile. Tile coordinates are either `(level, x, y)` for quadtrees, and `(level, x, y, z)` for octrees.

Tile coordinates are interpreted differently depending on the type of bounding volume (`box` or `region`).

For `box`, the tile coordinates are listed along the same direction as the Cartesian coordinate system of the tileset. That is:

| Coordinate | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `level` | The 0-indexed level number. The root tile is at level 0, the root tile's children are at level 1, and so on. |
| `x` | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the side of the root bounding box in the `+x` direction. This is measured within a single level. |
| `y` | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the side of the root bounding box in the `+y` direction. This is measured within a single level.|
| `z` (only for octrees) | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the side of the root bounding box in the `+z` direction. This is measured within a single level. |

> ![Box coordinates](figures/box-coordinates.jpg)

Reviewer: Template URIs are being used in this diagram, so we need to either use the tuple form, or move the template URI section up. Another solution could be to add a legend at the top of the diagram indicating how to interpret the tile labels.

For `region` bounding volumes, the coordinates are interpreted in Cartographic space. That is:

| Coordinate | Description |
|---|---|
| `level` | The 0-indexed level number. The root tile is at level 0, the root tile's children are at level 1, and so on. |
| `x` | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the west end of the bounding region in the direction of increasing longitude. This is measured within a single level. |
| `y` | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the north end of the bounding region in the direction of increasing latitude. This is measured within a single level. |
| `z` | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the bottom of the bounding region in the direction of increasing height. This is measured within a single level. |

![Region Coordinates](figures/region-coordinates.jpg)

## Template URIs

>**Template URIs** are URI patterns used to refer to specific tiles by their tile coordinates.

> Template URIs are configured in the tileset.json. They may be any URI pattern, but must include the variables `${level}`, `${x}`, `${x}`, and for octrees also `${z}`. When referring to a specific tile, the tile's coordinates are substituted in for these variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Template URIs are configured in the tileset.json. They may be any URI pattern, but must include the variables `${level}`, `${x}`, `${y}`, and for octrees also `${z}`. When referring to a specific tile, the tile's coordinates are substituted in for these variables.
```

Here are some examples of template URIs and files that they match:

```
== Quadtree Example ==
Pattern: "content/${level}/${x}/${y}/tile.b3dm"
Valid filenames: 
- content/0/0/0/tile.b3dm
- content/1/1/0/tile.b3dm
- content/3/2/2/tile.b3dm

== Octree Example ==
Pattern: "content/${level}/${z}/${y}/${x}.pnts"
Valid filenames:
- content/0/0/0/0.pnts
- content/1/1/1/1.pnts
- content/3/2/1/0.pnts
```

Unless otherwise specified, template URIs are resolved relative to the tileset.json file.

![Template URI](figures/template-uri.jpg)

## Content

>**Content** is an optional 3D model associated with a single tile, as described in the [Introduction section](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/tree/master/specification#introduction) of the Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 specification, with the addition of an explicit `mimeType`. 

This extension adds the `mimeType` property to identify the type of content. This is more reliable than a file extension for determining the file type.

> To use glTF models (`.gltf` files) or binary glTF models (`.glb` files) as content, the `3DTILES_content_gltf` extension must be listed as a required extension in the tileset.

Reviewer: This may not belong in this spec.

## Subtrees

>**Subtrees** are fixed-depth and fixed-branching factor sections of the tileset tree used for breaking tilesets into manageable pieces.

Since tilesets grow exponentially with depth, storing information about every tile in a single file is not always feasible or desirable. Even if RAM is not a direct limitation, streaming large files over the network can make loading times slower. To account for this, subtrees partition the tileset structure into pieces of bounded size.

![exact cover](figures/union-of-subtrees.jpg)

Each subtree is a tree-shaped container for tiles. A subtree has a fixed number of levels defined by the `subtreeLevels` property. This describes the number of distinct levels in the tree. The branching factor is also fixed due to the tiling scheme. For quadtrees, the branching factor is `4`, while octrees have a branching factor of `8`. Taken together, a subtree has exactly enough nodes to store a full quadtree or full octree with a limited depth. However, each node may or may not contain a tile, as a tileset only stores the tiles that are necessary.

![subtree anatomy](figures/subtree-anatomy.jpg)

OUTLINE:

> - refering to nodes is confusing. review this!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- referring to nodes is confusing. review this!
```

## Availability

**Availability** is boolean data about which tiles, contents, or subtrees exist in a tileset. Availability serves two purposes:

1. It provides an efficient method for checking what files are present
2. Including ths information prevents extraneous HTTP requests that would result in 404 errors.

> Availablity takes the form of a bitstream with one bit per node in consideration. A 1 indicates that a tile/content/subtree is available at this node. Meanwhile, a 0 indicates that no data is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Availablity takes the form of a bitstream with one bit per node in consideration. A 1 indicates that a tile/content/subtree is available at this node. Meanwhile, a 0 indicates that a tile/content/subtree is not available at this node.
```

I would be explicit about this here, even though it risks being too verbose. "No data" sounded vague to me.

> When every node is available or every node is unavailable, all the bits of the bitstream will be identical. That is, either all 1s or all 0s. Instead of storing a full bit stream, the `constant` property can be used instead. For example, `constant: 0` indicates that all bits are 0 and no bitstream must be stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For cases where all node are available or all nodes are unavailable, the `constant` property should be used instead of storing a full bitstream. For example, `constant: 0` indicates that all bits are 0 and no bitstream must be stored.
```

Availability data is scoped to a subtree. This ensures that the size of each bitstream is bounded to a reasonable size.

### Tile Availability

**Tile availability** is a bitstream that determines which tiles exist within a subtree. There is one bit for each subtree node. A 1 indicates that a tile is available, while a 0 indicates that a tile is unavailable.

> ![Tile Availability](figures/tile-availability.jpg)

Reviewer: This diagram may potentially mislead someone into believing that binary trees are supported. We should use quadtrees.

Author: Yeah, my only hesitation is that a quadtree diagram could get quite a bit wider (since we need to show the entire buffer). 

As a group we decided to hold off for now and find a better solution later.

In the diagram above, colored nodes indicated available tile, while nodes with dashed outlines are unavailable tiles.

If a tile is marked as available, more information about the tile, such as its content or children can be queried. If a tile is marked as unavailable, the tile must be skipped.

### Content Availability

**Content availability** is a bitstream that determines which tiles have an associated content file. Like tile availability, there is one bit for each subtree node. A 1 indicates a content file exists for this tile, while a 0 indicates that no content file exists.

![Content Availability](figures/content-availability.jpg)

The purpose of content availability is to check if a file exists before making a network request. If content is marked as unavailable, the network request for that file must be skipped.

> A content availablity bit must only be set if the corresponding tile availability bit is set. Otherwise, it would be possible to specify content files that are not reachable by the tiles of the tileset. The content availability bitstream can be validiated by checking that the following equation holds true:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A content availablity bit must only be set if the corresponding tile availability bit is set. Otherwise, it would be possible to specify content files that are not reachable by the tiles of the tileset. The content availability bitstream can be validated by checking that the following equation holds true:
```

![Morton Order](figures/morton-indexing.png)

### Availability Encoding

Availability bitstreams are packed in binary using the format described in the [Boolean Data section](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/blob/3d-tiles-next/specification/Metadata/0.0.0/README.md#boolean-data) of the Cesium 3D Metadata Specification.

Each availability bitstream must be stored as a separate `bufferView`, but multiple `bufferViews` may be stored in a single `buffer`.

## Tileset JSON

>Using implicit tiling, the tileset JSON file describes the root tile, tiling scheme, and template URIs for locating resources.

In the extension object, the following information about the root tile is included:

| Property | Description |
| ------ | ----------- |
| `tilingScheme` | Either `QUADTREE` or `OCTREE`|
| `boundingVolume` | a bounding volume (either a `box` or `region`) describing the root tile |
| `refine` | Either `ADD` or `REPLACE` as in the Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 Specification. |
| `geometricError` | Geometric error of the root tile as described in the Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 Specification. |

> | `maximumLevel` | Maxium level of the entire tree |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `maximumLevel` | Maximum level of the entire tree |
```

> | `subtreeLevels` | How many distince levels in each subtree. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `subtreeLevels` | How many distance levels in each subtree. |
```

        "uri": "terrain/${level}/${x}/${y}.gltf"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
## Glossary

* **availability** - Data specifying which tiles are available within a single subtree. This helps prevent unnecessary network requests.
* **available tile** - A tile that exists in the dataset.
* **boolean array** - An array of boolean values.
* **bitstream** - A boolean array stored as a sequence of bits rather than bytes.
* **child subtree** - A subtree reachable from an available tile in the bottommost row of a subtree.
* **child subtree availability** - Information about what child subtrees are available.
* **content availability** - Information about which tiles have an associated content file within a single subtree.
* **explicit tiling** - Describing a tileset by providing information about every tile.
* **implicit tiling** - Describing a tileset by providing information about the root tile and a pattern for subdividing the tile.
* **octree** - A 3D tiling scheme that divides each cuboid into 8 smaller cuboids.
* **quadtree** - A 2D tiling scheme that divides each rectangle into 4 smaller rectangles.
* **root tile** - The topmost tile in a tileset tree.

> * **subtree** - A fixed-depth section of the tileset tree used to break large tilesets into managable pieces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **subtree** - A fixed-depth section of the tileset tree used to break large tilesets into manageable pieces.
```

<!-- omit in toc -->
# 3DTILES_implicit_tiling

> **Version 0.0.0**, December 1, 2020

Author: What date should we put here? We technically finished the draft on the 11th, but we could also wait until the day we merge this PR. 

Just remember to update this on the landing page too.

<!-- omit in toc -->
## Contributors

* Sam Suhag, Cesium
* Sean Lilley, Cesium
* Peter Gagliardi, Cesium
* Erixen Cruz, Cesium

> * Patrick Cozzi, Cesium

Author: We should revisit the order of authors now that the text of this draft is written.

- [Tiling Schemes](#tiling-schemes)
  - [Implicit Subdivision](#implicit-subdivision)
- [Tile Coordinates](#tile-coordinates)
- [Template URIs](#template-uris)
- [Content](#content)
- [Subtrees](#subtrees)
- [Availability](#availability)
  - [Tile Availability](#tile-availability)
  - [Content Availability](#content-availability)
  - [Child Subtree Availability](#child-subtree-availability)
- [Subtree JSON Files](#subtree-json-files)
  - [Buffers and Buffer Views](#buffers-and-buffer-views)
  - [Morton Order](#morton-order)
  - [Availability Encoding](#availability-encoding)
- [Tileset JSON](#tileset-json)
- [Glossary](#glossary)
- [Examples](#examples)
  - [Quadtree with four levels](#quadtree-with-four-levels)
- [Octree Example](#octree-example)
- [JSON Schema Reference](#json-schema-reference)
- [Appendix A: Tree Indexing Formulas](#appendix-a-tree-indexing-formulas)
  - [Morton Indexing Formulas](#morton-indexing-formulas)
  - [Availability Formulas](#availability-formulas)
    - [Tile and Content Availability Formulas](#tile-and-content-availability-formulas)
    - [Child Subtree Availability Formulas](#child-subtree-availability-formulas)

## Overview

> >**Implicit tiling** is a alternative method for describing a Cesium 3D Tileset that provides a more succinct representation for large tilesets. It encodes the hierarchical structure of the tileset in binary, as opposed to explicit tiling, which specifies the tile hierarchy in JSON. The Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 specification only supports explicit tiling, as every tile is listed in the tileset JSON file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Implicit tiling** is an alternative method for describing a Cesium 3D Tileset that provides a more succinct representation for large tilesets. It encodes the hierarchical structure of the tileset in binary, as opposed to explicit tiling, which specifies the tile hierarchy in JSON. The Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 specification only supports explicit tiling, as every tile is listed in the tileset JSON file.
```

Implicit tiling keeps the tileset JSON file small, which makes loading large tilesets faster. While explicit tiling can be used to represent large datasets, the tileset JSON file grows linearly with the number of tiles. Implicit tiling keeps the tileset JSON file bounded in size.

Implicit tiling also provides a method for accessing tiles by tile coordinates. This allows for abbreviated tree traversal algorithms.

> ![Explicit vs Implicit Tiling](figures/implicit-vs-explicit.jpg)

Reviewer 2: Should clarify binary tree is for visualization only since we only support quad and oct.

For a complete list of terminology used, see the [Glossary](#glossary).

## Use Cases

_This section is non-normative_

Implicit tiling allows Cesium 3D Tiles to support a variety of new use cases.

A key use for implicit tiling is enabling and/or accelerating tree traversal algorithms. For example, Cesium uses a [skip-LOD](https://cesium.com/blog/2017/05/05/skipping-levels-of-detail/) algorithm for faster loading times. Accessing a tile by coordinates is faster than traversing the entire tree. Likewise, raycasting algorithms and GIS algorithms can benefit from the abbreviated tree traversals.

Implicit tiling also allows for better interoperability with existing GIS data formats with implicitly defined tiling schemes. Some examples are:

* [CDB](https://docs.opengeospatial.org/is/15-113r5/15-113r5.html)
* [S2](http://s2geometry.io/)
* [WMTS](https://www.ogc.org/standards/wmts)
* [TMS](https://wiki.osgeo.org/wiki/Tile_Map_Service_Specification)

> One new feature implicit tiling enables is procedurally-generated tilesets. Since implicit tiling encodes tile coordinates in URLs (such as `{level}/{x}/{y}/model.gltf`), consider the server that serves these files. Instead of serving static files, a server could extract the tile coordinates from the URL and generate tiles at runtime. This could be useful for making a large procedural terrain dataset without requiring much disk space.

Author: This paragraph could use some rewording. Also we might want to be careful about talking about template URIs since they are not described until a later section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One new feature implicit tiling enables is procedurally-generated tilesets. Since implicit tiling encodes tile coordinates in URLs using [Template URIs](#template-uris), consider the server that serves these files. Instead of serving static files, a server could extract the tile coordinates from the URL and generate tiles at runtime. This could be useful for making a large procedural terrain dataset without requiring much disk space.
```

> One new feature implicit tiling enables is procedurally-generated tilesets. Since implicit tiling encodes tile coordinates in URLs (such as `{level}/{x}/{y}/model.gltf`), consider the server that serves these files. Instead of serving static files, a server could extract the tile coordinates from the URL and generate tiles at runtime. This could be useful for making a large procedural terrain dataset without requiring much disk space.

Author: Also, probably not wise to mention gltf content, that goes beyond the scope of this spec.

![Octree](figures/octree.png)

The following diagrams illustrate the subdivision in the bounding volume types supported by 3D Tiles:

| Root Box | Quadtree | Octree |
|:---:|:--:|:--:|
| ![Root box](figures/box.png) | ![Box Quadtree](figures/box-quadtree.png) | ![Box octree](figures/box-octree.png)  |

| Root Region | Quadtree | Octree |
|:---:|:--:|:--:|
| ![Root region](figures/region.png) | ![Region Quadtree](figures/region-quadtree.png) | ![Region octree](figures/region-octree.png)  |

### Implicit Subdivision

Implicit tiling only requires defining the tiling scheme, bounding volume, geometric error, and refine strategy at the root tile. These properties can be computed for any other tile based on the following rules:

| Property | Subdivision Rule | 
| --- | --- |
| `tilingScheme` | Constant for all tiles in tileset |
| `refine` | Constant for all tiles in tileset |
| `boundingVolume` | If `tilingScheme` is `QUADTREE`, the parent tile is divided into 4 child tiles. If `tilingScheme` is `OCTREE` the child tile is divided into 8 child tiles. |
| `geometricError` | Each child's `geometricError` is half of the parent's `geometricError` |

## Tile Coordinates

> >**Tile coordinates** are a tuple of integers that uniquely identify a tile. Tile coordinates are either `(level, x, y)` for quadtrees, and `(level, x, y, z)` for octrees.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Tile coordinates** are a tuple of integers that uniquely identify a tile. Tile coordinates are either `(level, x, y)` for quadtrees or `(level, x, y, z)` for octrees.
```

Tile coordinates are interpreted differently depending on the type of bounding volume (`box` or `region`).

For `box`, the tile coordinates are listed along the same direction as the Cartesian coordinate system of the tileset. That is:

| Coordinate | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `level` | The 0-indexed level number. The root tile is at level 0, the root tile's children are at level 1, and so on. |
| `x` | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the side of the root bounding box in the `+x` direction. This is measured within a single level. |
| `y` | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the side of the root bounding box in the `+y` direction. This is measured within a single level.|

> | `z` (only for octrees) | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the side of the root bounding box in the `+z` direction. This is measured within a single level. |

Author: Reword these a little.  should be "number of tiles from the side of the root bounding box in order of increasing x coordinate"

However, if we can find a more concise way to express this, that would be even better.

Reviewer: Instead of adding verbosity in the coordinate descriptions, consider adding some text immediately before or after this table noting that all coordinates are 0 indexed.

![Box coordinates](figures/box-coordinates.jpg)

For `region` bounding volumes, the coordinates are interpreted in Cartographic space. That is:

| Coordinate | Description |
|---|---|
| `level` | The 0-indexed level number. The root tile is at level 0, the root tile's children are at level 1, and so on. |
| `x` | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the west end of the bounding region in the direction of increasing longitude. This is measured within a single level. |
| `y` | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the north end of the bounding region in the direction of increasing latitude. This is measured within a single level. |
| `z` | The 0-indexed number of tiles from the bottom of the bounding region in the direction of increasing height. This is measured within a single level. |

![Region Coordinates](figures/region-coordinates.jpg)

## Template URIs

>**Template URIs** are URI patterns used to refer to specific tiles by their tile coordinates.

> Template URIs are configured in the tileset.json. They may be any URI pattern, but must include the variables `${level}`, `${x}`, `${y}`, and for octrees also `${z}`. When referring to a specific tile, the tile's coordinates are substituted in for these variables.

Author: ```suggestion
Template URIs are configured in the tileset.json. They may be any URI pattern, but must include the variables `${level}`, `${x}`, `${y}`. Template URIs for octrees must also include `${z}`. When referring to a specific tile, the tile's coordinates are substituted in for these variables.
```

![Content Availability](figures/content-availability.jpg)

The purpose of content availability is to check if a file exists before making a network request. If content is marked as unavailable, the network request for that file must be skipped.

A content availability bit must only be set if the corresponding tile availability bit is set. Otherwise, it would be possible to specify content files that are not reachable by the tiles of the tileset. The content availability bitstream can be validated by checking that the following equation holds true:

```
contentAvailability & ~tileAvailability === 0
```

where `&` is the bitwise AND operation and `~` is the bitwise NOT operation.

### Child Subtree Availability

**Child subtree availability** is a bitstream that determines what subtrees can be reached from this subtree. There are `N` bits for every node in the bottom-most level of the subtree, where `N` is the branching factor of the tree. A 1 means there is a child subtree available at that position in the tree. Meanwhile, a 0 means there is no subtree available.

![Child Subtree Availability](figures/subtree-availability.jpg)

> Child subtree availability is used to determine whether further subtree files exist before making network requests. If a child subtree availability bit is 0, any network request for that subtree must be skipped.

Author: I find this wording somewhat ambiguous. "further" isn't the right word here.

Reviewer: An alternative phrasing could be:

```suggestion
Child subtree availability is used to determine whether files for child subtrees exist before making network requests. If a child subtree availability bit is 0, any network request for that subtree must be skipped.
```

## Subtree JSON Files

A **subtree JSON file** describes where the availability information for a single subtree is stored.

Each subtree JSON file contains the following information:

* The location of a bitstream for tile availability (if not `constant`)
* The location of a bitstream for content availability (if not `constant`)
* The location of a bitstream for child subtree availability (if not `constant`)

### Buffers and Buffer Views

OUTLINE:

> - Which spec to reference? 3DTILES_binary_buffers or core metadata?

Author: @sanjeetsuhag @ErixenCruz we should discuss this today.

Author: This should reference 3DTILES_binary_buffers, though that [draft spec](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/tree/3DTILES_binary_buffers/extensions/3DTILES_binary_buffers) doesn't really explain what buffers/bufferViews are...

Author: No, we're just going to describe this inline. If possible we want only implicit tiling to need buffer views.

### Morton Order

>**[Morton order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-order_curve)** assigns indices to nodes in the same level. The indices are used for lookup in availability buffers.

Using the Morton order serves these purposes:

- Efficient tile location decomposition: The Morton order allows efficient encoding and decoding of locations of a tile in the level to its location in the availability buffers.
- Efficient traversal: The binary representation of tile locations in the tree level allow for easy traversal of the tileset (finding parent and child nodes).
- Locality of reference: Adjacent indices are stored close to each other in memory and are close to each other spatially.

> *The following section is non-normative*

Author: Put this in a subsection like `#### Morton Order Example`

> The figure below shows the tile location decomposition of the tile `3/5/1` (Level: 3, X: 5, Y: 1). We first convert the tile location to its Morton index, which is `19`. At Level 3 of a Quadtree, we'll use 6 bits to represent the binary value of the Morton index: `010011`.

Author: Use tuple notation when referring to coordinates, as template URIs can be configured by the user.

```suggestion
The figure below shows the tile location decomposition of the tile `(level, x, y) = (3, 5, 1)`. We first convert the tile location to its Morton index, which is `19`. At Level 3 of a Quadtree, we'll use 6 bits to represent the binary value of the Morton index: `010011`.
```

![Morton Order](figures/morton-indexing.png)

> ### Availability Encoding

Author: Oh I just realized we never specified alignment rules. Can we inherit them from the metadata specification?

Reviewer: Yes, unless we have a specific reason to deviate from them.

| `maximumLevel` | Maximum level of the entire tree |
| `subtreeLevels` | How many distance levels in each subtree. |

Furthermore, template URIs are used for locating subtree JSON files as well as tile contents. The key properties are as follows:

| Option | Description |
| ------ | ----------- |
| `subtrees.uri` | template URI for a subtree JSON file. see [Subtrees](#subtrees) for more info |
| `content.uri` | template URI for the content 3D Models |

Below is a full example of how the tileset JSON file looks in practice:

```json
{
  "asset": {
    "version": "1.0"
  },
  "geometricError": 10000,
  "extensionsUsed": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensionsRequired": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensions": {
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling": {
      "extras": {
        "draftVersion": "0.0.0"
      },
      "boundingVolume": {
        "region": [-1.318, 0.697, -1.319, 0.698, 0, 20]
      },
      "refine": "REPLACE",
      "tilingScheme": "QUADTREE",
      "geometricError": 5000,
      "subtreeLevels": 7,
      "maximumLevel": 21,
      "subtrees": {
        "uri": "subtrees/${level}/${x}/${y}/subtree.json"
      },
      "content": {

>         "mimeType": "model/gltf+json",
>         "uri": "terrain/${level}/${x}/${y}.gltf"

Author: Let's not refer to glTF, stick to core 3D tiles formats.

```suggestion
        "mimeType": "application/octet-stream",
        "uri": "terrain/${level}/${x}/${y}.b3dm"
```

      }
    }
  }
}
```
## Glossary

> * **availability** - Data specifying which tiles are available within a single subtree. This helps prevent unnecessary network requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **availability** - Data specifying which tiles/subtrees/contents are available within a single subtree. This helps prevent unnecessary network requests.
```

* **octree** - A 3D tiling scheme that divides each cuboid into 8 smaller cuboids.
* **quadtree** - A 2D tiling scheme that divides each rectangle into 4 smaller rectangles.
* **root tile** - The topmost tile in a tileset tree.
* **subtree** - A fixed-depth section of the tileset tree used to break large tilesets into manageable pieces.
* **subtree file** - A JSON file storing information about a specific subtree.
* **subtree node** - A node in a subtree, regardless of whether there is an available tile there.
* **template URI** - A URI pattern containing tile coordinates for directly addressing tiles.
* **tile** - A tile as described in the Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 specification.
* **tile availability** - Information about which tiles exist within a single subtree.
* **tileset** - A tileset as described in the Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 specification.
* **tileset JSON** - A JSON file describing a tileset, as described in the Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 specification.
* **tiling scheme** - A well-defined method for subdividing a bounding volume into a hierarchy of tiles.
* **unavailable tile** - A region of space that does not contain a tile.

> ## Examples

Author: I feel like overall we could do better with examples if we had a more visual way of presenting at least one of them. Though as @ErixenCruz and I learned on Friday, putting together labeled examples can be time consuming (since determining morton order is necessary in some diagrams.

    }
    {
      "buffer": 0,
      "byteOffset": 10,
      "byteLength": 64
    }
  ],
  "tileAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 0
  },
  "contentAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 1
  },
  "childSubtreeAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 2
  }
}
```

File structure:

```
|__ tileset.json
|__ subtrees/
  |__ 0/
    |__ 0/
      |__ 0/
        |__ 0/
            |__ subtree.json
            |__ availability.bin
  |__ 3/
    |__ 0/
      |__ 0/
        |__ 0/
          |__ subtree.json
          |__ availability.bin
  |__ 6/
    |__ 0/
      |__ 0/
        |__ 0/
        |__ subtree.json
        |__ availability.bin
|__ models/
  |__ 8/
    |__ 0/
      |__ 0/
        |__ 0/
          |__ model.pnts
        |__ 1/
          |__ model.pnts
      |__ 1/
        |__ 0/
          |__ model.pnts
        |__ 1/
          |__ model.pnts
    |__ 1/
      |__ 0/
        |__ 0/
          |__ model.pnts
        |__ 1/
          |__ model.pnts
      |__ 1/
        |__ 0/
          |__ model.pnts
        |__ 1/
          |__ model.pnts
```

OUTLINE:
- double-headed quadtree as explicit root tileset + external implicit tilesets
- sparse, shallow octree
- deep, sparse quadtree

> - Full quadtree (medium depth)

Author: We should remove this

Implicit tiling also allows for better interoperability with existing GIS data formats with implicitly defined tiling schemes. Some examples are:

* [CDB](https://docs.opengeospatial.org/is/15-113r5/15-113r5.html)
* [S2](http://s2geometry.io/)
* [WMTS](https://www.ogc.org/standards/wmts)
* [TMS](https://wiki.osgeo.org/wiki/Tile_Map_Service_Specification)

Implicit tiling enables procedurally-generated tilesets. Instead of serving static files, a server could extract the tile coordinates from [Template URIs](#template-uris) and generate tiles at runtime while using little disk space.

## Tileset JSON
Like in [3D Tiles 1.0](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/tree/master/specification#tileset-json), one main tileset JSON file is the entry point for defining an implicit tileset. To use implicit tiling, the `3DTILES_implicit_tiling` extension must be defined in the root tile of the `tileset.json`.
```json

> {

Reviewer 3: the tileset geometricError is missing

Reviewer 3: This problem shows up in a few other places within the document

  "asset": {
    "version": "1.0"
  },
  "extensionsUsed": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensionsRequired": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "root": {
    "boundingVolume": {
      "region": [-1.318, 0.697, -1.319, 0.698, 0, 20]
    },
    "refine": "REPLACE",
    "geometricError": 5000,
    "extensions": {
      "3DTILES_implicit_tiling": {
        ...

>       }

Reviewer 3: Missing `}` on line below

`x`, `y`, and `z` coordinates are measured in tiles from a side of the root bounding volume at the current level along one of the coordinate axes. The type of bounding volume (`box` or `region`) determines the direction of increasing tile coordinates.

For `box`, the tile coordinates are listed along the same direction as the Cartesian coordinate system of the tileset. That is:

| Coordinate | Positive Direction |
| --- | --- |
| `x` | Along the `+x` axis of the bounding box |
| `y` | Along the `+y` axis of the bounding box |
| `y` | Along the `+z` axis of the bounding box |

![Box coordinates](figures/box-coordinates.jpg)

For `region` bounding volumes, the coordinates are interpreted in Cartographic space, as desribed in [the 1.0 specification](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/tree/master/specification#region). That is:

| Coordinate | Positive Direction |
|---|---|
| `x` | From west to east (increasing longitude) |
| `y` | From south to north (increasing latitude) |
| `z` | From bottom to top (increasing height) |

![Region Coordinates](figures/region-coordinates.jpg)

## Template URIs

A **Template URI** is a URI pattern used to refer to tiles by their tile coordinates.

> Template URIs are configured in the tileset.json. They may be any URI pattern, but must include the variables `{level}`, `{x}`, `{y}`. Template URIs for octrees must also include `${z}`. When referring to a specific tile, the tile's coordinates are substituted in for these variables.

Author: the `${z}` should be `{z}`

```suggestion
Template URIs are configured in the tileset.json. They may be any URI pattern, but must include the variables `{level}`, `{x}`, `{y}`. Template URIs for octrees must also include `{z}`. When referring to a specific tile, the tile's coordinates are substituted in for these variables.
```

Valid filenames: 
- content/0/0/0/tile.b3dm
- content/1/1/0/tile.b3dm
- content/3/2/2/tile.b3dm

== Octree Example ==
Pattern: "content/{level}/{z}/{y}/{x}.pnts"
Valid filenames:
- content/0/0/0/0.pnts
- content/1/1/1/1.pnts
- content/3/2/1/0.pnts
```

Unless otherwise specified, template URIs are resolved relative to the tileset.json file.

![Template URI](figures/template-uri.jpg)

## Content

**Content** is an optional 3D model associated with a single tile, as described in the [Introduction section](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/tree/master/specification#introduction) of the Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 specification, with the addition of an explicit `mimeType` to reliably identify the type of content.
```json
{
  "asset": {
    "version": "1.0"
  },
  "extensionsUsed": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensionsRequired": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "root": {
    "boundingVolume": {
      "region": [-1.318, 0.697, -1.319, 0.698, 0, 20]
    },
    "refine": "REPLACE",
    "geometricError": 5000,
    "extensions": {
      "3DTILES_implicit_tiling": {
        "subdivisionScheme": "QUADTREE",
        "content": {
          "mimeType": "application/octet-stream",

>           "uri": "terrain/${level}/${x}/${y}.b3dm"

Author: ```suggestion
          "uri": "terrain/{level}/{x}/{y}.b3dm"
```

Furthermore, template URIs are used for resolving subtree JSON files as well as tile contents. The key properties are as follows:

| Property | Description |
| ------ | ----------- |
| `subtrees` | template URI for a subtree JSON file. See [Subtrees](#subtrees) for more info |
| `content` | template URI for the content 3D Models |

Below is a full example of how the tileset JSON file looks in practice:

```json
{
  "asset": {
    "version": "1.0"
  },
  "geometricError": 10000,
  "extensionsUsed": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensionsRequired": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensions": {
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling": {
      "extras": {
        "draftVersion": "0.0.0"
      },
      "boundingVolume": {
        "region": [-1.318, 0.697, -1.319, 0.698, 0, 20]
      },
      "refine": "REPLACE",
      "subdivisionScheme": "QUADTREE",
      "geometricError": 5000,
      "subtreeLevels": 7,
      "maximumLevel": 21,
      "subtrees": "subtrees/{level}/{x}/{y}/subtree.json",
      "content": {
        "mimeType": "application/octet-stream",
        "uri": "terrain/{level}/{x}/{y}.b3dm"
      }
    }
  }
}

> {

Reviewer 3: copy paste mistake?

  "asset": {
    "version": "1.0"
  },
  "extensionsUsed": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensionsRequired": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "root": {
    "boundingVolume": {
      "region": [-1.318, 0.697, -1.319, 0.698, 0, 20]
    },
    "refine": "REPLACE",
    "geometricError": 5000,
    "extensions": {
      "3DTILES_implicit_tiling": {
        "subdivisionScheme": "QUADTREE",
        "content": {
          "mimeType": "application/octet-stream",

>           "uri": "terrain/${level}/${x}/${y}.b3dm"

Author: ```suggestion
          "uri": "terrain/{level}/{x}/{y}.b3dm"
```

* **subtree** - A fixed-size section of the tileset tree used to break large tilesets into manageable pieces.
* **subtree JSON** - A JSON file storing information about a specific subtree.
* **template URI** - A URI pattern containing tile coordinates for directly addressing tiles.
* **tile** - A division of space that may contain content.
* **tileset** - A hierarchical collection of tiles.
* **tileset JSON** - A JSON file describing a tileset, as described in the [Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 specification](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/tree/master/specification#tileset-json).
* **subdivision scheme** - A recursive pattern of dividing a parent tile into smaller children tiles occupying the same area. This is done by uniformly dividing the bounding volume of the parent tile.

## Examples
Here are some complete examples for how to create commonly used data structures with implicit tiling.
### Quadtree with four levels
Consider a tileset with a quadtree tiling scheme and four levels of detail. Suppose that we want to use implicit tiling with subtrees with 2 levels.

![Quadtree example](figures/quadtree-example.jpg)

The root tileset JSON might look something this:
```json

> {

Reviewer 3: This tileset is missing `"root"`

  "asset": {
    "version": "1.0"
  },
  "geometricError": 10000,
  "extensionsUsed": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensionsRequired": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensions": {
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling": {
      "extras": {
        "draftVersion": "0.0.0"
      },
      "boundingVolume": {
        "region": [-1.318, 0.697, -1.319, 0.698, 0, 20]
      },
      "refine": "ADD",
      "subdivisionScheme": "QUADTREE",
      "geometricError": 5000,
      "subtreeLevels": 2,
      "maximumLevel": 4,

>       "subtrees": "subtrees/${level}/${x}/${y}/subtree.json",

Author: ```suggestion
      "subtrees": "subtrees/{level}/{x}/{y}/subtree.json",
```

      "content": {
        "mimeType": "application/octet-stream",

>         "uri": "models/${level}/${x}/${y}.b3dm"

Author: ```suggestion
        "uri": "models/{level}/{x}/{y}.b3dm"
```

      "byteLength": 1
    },
    {
      "buffer": 0,
      "byteOffset": 1,
      "byteLength": 1
    },
    {
      "buffer": 0,
      "byteOffset": 2,
      "byteLength": 2
    }
  ],
  "tileAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 0
  },
  "contentAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 1
  },
  "childSubtreeAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 2
  },
}
```
In this example, tile, content, and child subtree availability are in one availability buffer. Buffer views split the buffer into the three parts. Since there are five nodes in the subtree, tile and content availability only need five bits each, so they each get one byte. There are 16 children, however, so two bytes are needed for child subtree availability.

`subtrees/2/1/0/subtree.json`
```json
{
  "tileAvailability": {
    "constant": 1
  },
  "contentAvailability": {
    "constant": 1
  },
  "childSubtreeAvailability": {
    "constant": 0
  },
}
```
This subtree at the bottom of the tree is completely full. It uses constants for its availabilities instead of buffers. Because it is at the bottom of the tree, there are no child subtrees, so child subtree availability is a constant zero.

## Octree Example

`tileset.json`:

```json

> {

Reviewer 3: also missing `"root"`

  "asset": {
    "version": "1.0"
  },
  "geometricError": 100,
  "extensionsUsed": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensionsRequired": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensions": {
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling": {
      "extras": {
        "draftVersion": "0.0.0"
      },
      "boundingVolume": {
        "box": [
          0, 0, 0,
          100, 0, 0,
          0, 100, 0
          0, 0, 100
        ]
      },
      "refine": "ADD",
      "subdivisionScheme": "OCTREE",
      "geometricError": 5000,
      "subtreeLevels": 3,
      "maximumLevel": 8,
      "subtrees": {

>         "uri": "subtrees/${level}/${z}/${y}/${x}/subtree.json"

Author: ```suggestion
        "uri": "subtrees/{level}/{z}/{y}/{x}/subtree.json"
```

      },
      "content": {
        "mimeType": "application/octet-stream",

>         "uri": "models/${level}/${z}/${y}/${x}/model.pnts"

Author: ```suggestion
        "uri": "models/{level}/{z}/{y}/{x}/model.pnts"
```

      "boundingVolume": {
        "region": [
          -0.0005682966577418737,
          0.8987233516605286,
          0.00011646582098558159,
          0.8990603398325034,
          0,
          241.6
        ]
      },
      "refine": "ADD",
      "subdivisionScheme": "QUADTREE"
    }
  }
}
```
## Tile Coordinates

**Tile coordinates** are a tuple of integers that uniquely identify a tile. Tile coordinates are either `(level, x, y)` for quadtrees or `(level, x, y, z)` for octrees. All tile coordinates are 0-indexed.

`level` is 0 for the root tile. The root tile's children are at level 1, and so on.

`x`, `y`, and `z` coordinates are measured in tiles from a side of the root bounding volume at the current level along one of the coordinate axes. The type of bounding volume (`box` or `region`) determines the direction of increasing tile coordinates.

For `box`, the tile coordinates are listed along the same direction as the Cartesian coordinate system of the tileset. That is:

| Coordinate | Positive Direction |
| --- | --- |
| `x` | Along the `+x` axis of the bounding box |
| `y` | Along the `+y` axis of the bounding box |
| `y` | Along the `+z` axis of the bounding box |

> ![Box coordinates](figures/box-coordinates.jpg)

Author: so far addressed the double-labeling and curved arrows. Third image (region bounding volume) needs to be redone to be more curved. But that's lower on the priority list, the focus should be on schema/spec changes.

| Coordinate | Positive Direction |
|---|---|
| `x` | From west to east (increasing longitude) |
| `y` | From south to north (increasing latitude) |
| `z` | From bottom to top (increasing height) |

![Region Coordinates](figures/region-coordinates.jpg)

## Template URIs

A **Template URI** is a URI pattern used to refer to tiles by their tile coordinates.

Template URIs are configured in the tileset.json. They may be any URI pattern, but must include the variables `${level}`, `${x}`, `${y}`. Template URIs for octrees must also include `${z}`. When referring to a specific tile, the tile's coordinates are substituted in for these variables.

Here are some examples of template URIs and files that they match:

```
== Quadtree Example ==
Pattern: "content/${level}/${x}/${y}/tile.b3dm"
Valid filenames: 
- content/0/0/0/tile.b3dm
- content/1/1/0/tile.b3dm
- content/3/2/2/tile.b3dm

== Octree Example ==
Pattern: "content/${level}/${z}/${y}/${x}.pnts"
Valid filenames:
- content/0/0/0/0.pnts
- content/1/1/1/1.pnts
- content/3/2/1/0.pnts
```

Unless otherwise specified, template URIs are resolved relative to the tileset.json file.

![Template URI](figures/template-uri.jpg)

## Content

> **Content** is an optional 3D model associated with a single tile, as described in the [Introduction section](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/tree/master/specification#introduction) of the Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 specification, with the addition of an explicit `mimeType` to reliably identify the type of content.

Reviewer 4: It's unfortunate that b3dm, i3dm, pnts, and cmpt don't have unique mime types yet which makes it hard to actually identify the type of content. CC https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/issues/341

Author: On the other hand, if we convert our formats to glTF, they'd all have the same `mimeType` anyway... See https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles-next/issues/91#issuecomment-761122165. still good to have the mimeType though, but might be easier to enforce in 2.0.

Author: Resolving as there's nothing actionable until 2.0

## Subtrees

**Subtrees** are fixed-sized sections of the tileset tree used for breaking tilesets into manageable pieces.

Since tilesets grow exponentially with depth, storing information about every tile in a single file is not always feasible or desirable. Even if RAM is not a direct limitation, streaming large files over the network can make loading times slower. To account for this, subtrees partition the tileset structure into pieces of bounded size.

![exact cover](figures/union-of-subtrees.jpg)

> A subtree has a fixed number of levels defined by the `subtreeLevels` property. This describes the number of distinct levels in the tree. The number of children per tile is also fixed due to the subdivision scheme. For quadtrees, there are `4` children per tile, while octrees have `8` children per tile. Taken together, a subtree has exactly enough tiles to store a full quadtree or full octree with a limited number of levels. However, each tile may or may not exist or contain content, as a tileset only stores the tiles that are necessary.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A subtree has a fixed number of levels defined by the `subtreeLevels` property. This describes the number of distinct levels in the subtree. The number of children per tile is also fixed due to the subdivision scheme. For quadtrees, there are `4` children per tile, while octrees have `8` children per tile. Taken together, a subtree has exactly enough tiles to store a full quadtree or full octree with a limited number of levels. However, each tile may or may not exist or contain content, as a tileset only stores the tiles that are necessary.
```

> ![subtree anatomy](figures/subtree-anatomy.jpg)

Reviewer 4: This diagram might be slightly more readable if the arrows and the outer triangle are thinner

## Availability

**Availability** is a boolean that defines whether a tile, content, or subtree exist in a tileset. Availability serves two purposes:

> 1. It provides an efficient method for checking what files are present

Reviewer 4: "what" -> "which"?

```suggestion
1. It provides an efficient method for checking which files are present
```

> 2. Including ths information prevents extraneous HTTP requests that would result in 404 errors.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Including this information prevents extraneous HTTP requests that would result in 404 errors.
```

> 2. Including ths information prevents extraneous HTTP requests that would result in 404 errors.

Reviewer 4: The second bullet seems more like an example of the first bullet rather than a use case by itself

> Availability takes the form of a bitstream with one bit per node in consideration. A 1 indicates that a tile/content/subtree is available at this node. Meanwhile, a 0 indicates that no tile/content/subtree is available at this node.

Reviewer 4: Even though availability works the same way tile/content/subtree it might be confusing to describe them all together like this because it makes me think each node in the tree has subtree availability.

> For cases where all nodes are available or all nodes are unavailable, the `constant` property should be used instead of storing a full bitstream. For example, `constant: 0` indicates that all bits are 0 and no bitstream must be stored.

Reviewer 4: A JSON example might be helpful here. `constant: 1` might be a better example because it's a more common use case for the tree to be full rather than empty, though `constant: 0` does have its use cases too, like a tree where content only shows up deeper in the tree.

Availability data is scoped to a subtree. This ensures that the size of each bitstream is bounded to a reasonable size.

### Tile Availability

**Tile availability** is a bitstream that determines which tiles exist within a subtree. There is one bit for each subtree node. A 1 indicates that a tile is available, while a 0 indicates that a tile is unavailable.

> ![Tile Availability](figures/tile-availability.jpg)

Reviewer 4: The letters on the nodes are a little small and hard to read. Maybe instead of a gradient palette use a palette of different light colors.

> ![Tile Availability](figures/tile-availability.jpg)

Reviewer 4: Just to confirm, is the tile availability array in morton order here? For binary trees is morton order the same as being ordered left-to-right?

Reviewer 2: Yes I believe so.

Author: trivally, yes binary trees are in morton order when numbered from left-to-right. `mortonIndex = interleave(z, y, x)` but if you only have a single `x` coordinate, than `mortonIndex = interleave(x) = x`

That said, this gets back to the question of whether we should use binary trees at all in the spec. They're nice for illustration purposes since they fit better on the page, quadtrees tend to require wide diagrams. That said, in order to see the morton order, it really is non-obvious unless you use a quadtree...

In the diagram above, colored nodes indicate available tiles, while nodes with dashed outlines are unavailable tiles.

> If a tile is marked as available, more information about the tile, such as its content or children can be queried. If a tile is marked as unavailable, the tile must be skipped.

Reviewer 4: There are some rules that are included in the schema that should also be mentioned in the spec text. One example is "If a non-root tile's availability is 1 its parent tile's availability must also be 1."

### Content Availability

**Content availability** is a bitstream that determines which tiles have an associated content file. Like tile availability, there is one bit for each subtree node. A 1 indicates a content file exists for this tile, while a 0 indicates that no content file exists.

![Content Availability](figures/content-availability.jpg)

The purpose of content availability is to check if a file exists before making a network request. If content is marked as unavailable, the network request for that file must be skipped.

A content availability bit must only be set if the corresponding tile availability bit is set. Otherwise, it would be possible to specify content files that are not reachable by the tiles of the tileset. The content availability bitstream can be validated by checking that the following equation holds true:

```
contentAvailability & ~tileAvailability === 0

> ```

Reviewer 4: Personally I don't think the the validation equation needs to be included since the explanation in the previous sentences is already pretty clear.

where `&` is the bitwise AND operation and `~` is the bitwise NOT operation.

### Child Subtree Availability

> **Child subtree availability** is a bitstream that determines what subtrees can be reached from this subtree. There are `N` bits for every node in the bottom-most level of the subtree, where `N` is the branching factor of the tree. A 1 means there is a child subtree available at that position in the tree. Meanwhile, a 0 means there is no subtree available.

Reviewer 4: "what" -> "which"?

```suggestion
**Child subtree availability** is a bitstream that determines which subtrees can be reached from this subtree. There are `N` bits for every node in the bottom-most level of the subtree, where `N` is the branching factor of the tree. A 1 means there is a child subtree available at that position in the tree. Meanwhile, a 0 means there is no subtree available.
```

- Efficient traversal: The binary representation of tile locations in the tree level allow for easy traversal of the tileset (finding parent and child nodes).
- Locality of reference: Adjacent indices are stored close to each other in memory and are close to each other spatially.

#### Morton Order Example

_The following section is non-normative_

The figure below shows the tile location decomposition of the tile `(level, x, y) = (3, 5, 1)`. We first convert the tile location to its Morton index, which is `19`. At Level 3 of a Quadtree, we'll use 6 bits to represent the binary value of the Morton index: `010011`.

![Morton Order](figures/morton-indexing.png)

### Availability Encoding

Availability bitstreams are packed in binary using the format described in the [Boolean Data section](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/blob/3d-tiles-next/specification/Metadata/0.0.0/README.md#boolean-data) of the Cesium 3D Metadata Specification. These bitstreams are subject to alignment requirements described in the [Binary Alignment Rules section](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/tree/3DTILES_binary_buffers/extensions/3DTILES_binary_buffers) of the same specification.

> Each availability bitstream must be stored as a separate `bufferView`, but multiple `bufferViews` may be stored in a single `buffer`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Each availability bitstream must be stored as a separate `bufferView`, but multiple `bufferViews` may refer to a single `buffer`.
```

## Tileset JSON

Using implicit tiling, the tileset JSON file describes the root tile, tiling scheme, and template URIs for locating resources.

In the extension object, the following information about the root tile is included:

| Property | Description |
| ------ | ----------- |
| `tilingScheme` | Either `QUADTREE` or `OCTREE`|

> | `boundingVolume` | a bounding volume (either a `box` or `region`) describing the root tile |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `boundingVolume` | A bounding volume (either a `box` or `region`) describing the root tile |
```

| `refine` | Either `ADD` or `REPLACE` as in the Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 Specification. |
| `geometricError` | Geometric error of the root tile as described in the Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 Specification. |

> | `maximumLevel` | Maximum level of the entire tree |

Reviewer 4: Is this actually the maximum level of the last available tile? Or last available content?

Author: tile. I updated the text.

| `subtreeLevels` | How many distance levels in each subtree. |

Furthermore, template URIs are used for locating subtree JSON files as well as tile contents. The key properties are as follows:

| Option | Description |
| ------ | ----------- |

> | `subtrees.uri` | template URI for a subtree JSON file. see [Subtrees](#subtrees) for more info |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `subtrees.uri` | Template URI for a subtree JSON file. See [Subtrees](#subtrees) for more info |
```

> | `content.uri` | template URI for the content 3D Models |

Reviewer 4: Be careful not to use "3D Models" terminology too much because someday we may support other content types like rasters

```suggestion
| `content.uri` | Template URI for the content |
```

Below is a full example of how the tileset JSON file looks in practice:

```json
{
  "asset": {
    "version": "1.0"
  },
  "geometricError": 10000,
  "extensionsUsed": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensionsRequired": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensions": {
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling": {
      "extras": {
        "draftVersion": "0.0.0"
      },
      "boundingVolume": {
        "region": [-1.318, 0.697, -1.319, 0.698, 0, 20]
      },
      "refine": "REPLACE",
      "tilingScheme": "QUADTREE",
      "geometricError": 5000,
      "subtreeLevels": 7,

>       "maximumLevel": 21,

Reviewer 4: While it's totally valid for `maximumLevel` to be 20 or 21, I think the example should be 20 so that three subtrees neatly fit into the tileset JSON. With 21 there is spillover into a fourth layer of subtrees.

      "subtrees": {
        "uri": "subtrees/${level}/${x}/${y}/subtree.json"
      },
      "content": {
        "mimeType": "application/octet-stream",
        "uri": "terrain/${level}/${x}/${y}.b3dm"
      }
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 4: It would be helpful to also see a subtree JSON alongside this

* **tileset JSON** - A JSON file describing a tileset, as described in the [Cesium 3D Tiles 1.0 specification](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/tree/master/specification#tileset-json).
* **subdivision scheme** - A recursive pattern of dividing a parent tile into smaller children tiles occupying the same area. This is done by uniformly dividing the bounding volume of the parent tile.

## Examples

### Quadtree with four levels
Consider a tileset with a quadtree tiling scheme and four levels of detail. Suppose that we want to use implicit tiling with subtrees with 2 levels.

![Quadtree example](figures/quadtree-example.jpg)

The root tileset JSON might look something this:
```json
{
  "asset": {
    "version": "1.0"
  },
  "geometricError": 10000,
  "extensionsUsed": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensionsRequired": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensions": {
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling": {
      "extras": {
        "draftVersion": "0.0.0"
      },
      "boundingVolume": {
        "region": [-1.318, 0.697, -1.319, 0.698, 0, 20]
      },
      "refine": "ADD",
      "tilingScheme": "QUADTREE",
      "geometricError": 5000,
      "subtreeLevels": 2,

>       "maximumLevel": 4,

Reviewer 4: Same as the comment above, consider changing this to 3

    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensionsRequired": [
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling",
  ],
  "extensions": {
    "3DTILES_implicit_tiling": {
      "extras": {
        "draftVersion": "0.0.0"
      },
      "boundingVolume": {
        "box": [
          0, 0, 0,
          100, 0, 0,
          0, 100, 0
          0, 0, 100
        ]
      },
      "refine": "ADD",
      "tilingScheme": "OCTREE",
      "geometricError": 5000,
      "subtreeLevels": 3,
      "maximumLevel": 8,
      "subtrees": {
        "uri": "subtrees/${level}/${z}/${y}/${x}/subtree.json"
      },
      "content": {
        "mimeType": "application/octet-stream",
        "uri": "models/${level}/${z}/${y}/${x}/model.pnts"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

`subtrees/0/0/0/0/subtree.json`

```json
{
	"buffers": [
    {
      "uri": "availability.bin",
      "byteLength": 74
    }
  ],
  "bufferViews": [
    {
      "buffer": 0,
      "byteOffset": 0,
      "byteLength": 10
    },
    {
      "buffer": 0,
      "byteOffset": 10,
      "byteLength": 64
    }
  ],
  "tileAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 0
  },
  "contentAvailability": {
    "constant": 0
  },
  "childSubtreeAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 1
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 4: The formatting here is a little off

    {
      "buffer": 0,
      "byteOffset": 0,
      "byteLength": 10
    },
    {
      "buffer": 0,
      "byteOffset": 10,
      "byteLength": 10
    }
    {
      "buffer": 0,
      "byteOffset": 10,
      "byteLength": 64
    }
  ],
  "tileAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 0
  },
  "contentAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 1
  },
  "childSubtreeAvailability": {
    "bufferView": 2
  }
}
```

File structure:

```
|__ tileset.json
|__ subtrees/
  |__ 0/
    |__ 0/
      |__ 0/
        |__ 0/
            |__ subtree.json
            |__ availability.bin
  |__ 3/
    |__ 0/
      |__ 0/
        |__ 0/
          |__ subtree.json
          |__ availability.bin
  |__ 6/
    |__ 0/
      |__ 0/
        |__ 0/
        |__ subtree.json
        |__ availability.bin
|__ models/
  |__ 8/
    |__ 0/
      |__ 0/
        |__ 0/
          |__ model.pnts
        |__ 1/
          |__ model.pnts
      |__ 1/
        |__ 0/
          |__ model.pnts
        |__ 1/
          |__ model.pnts
    |__ 1/
      |__ 0/
        |__ 0/
          |__ model.pnts
        |__ 1/
          |__ model.pnts
      |__ 1/
        |__ 0/
          |__ model.pnts
        |__ 1/
          |__ model.pnts

> ```

Reviewer 4: While this is valid, a more common template uri would be `"models/${level}/${z}/${y}/${x}.pnts"`. It's a little weird to have so many `model.pnts` files in practice. It also makes this diagram bigger than it needs to be.

## JSON Schema Reference

OUTLINE:
- Generate via Wetzel
  
## Appendix A: Tree Indexing Formulas

### Morton Indexing Formulas

| Quantity | Formula | Description |
| -------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `N` | 4 or 8 | N is 4 for quadtrees, 8 for octrees |
| `bits` | `log2(N)` | Quadtree address are a multiple of 2 bits, Octrees use a multiple of 3 bits | 

> | `mortonIndex` | `interleave(z, y, x)` or `interleave(y, x)` | The morton index is computed by interleaving bits. see below. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `mortonIndex` | `interleave(z, y, x)` or `interleave(y, x)` | The morton index is computed by interleaving bits. See below. |
```

> | `length(mortonIndex)` | `level * bits` | length of morton index in bits

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `length(mortonIndex)` | `level * bits` | Length of morton index in bits
```

interleave(0b001, 0b010, 0b100) = 0b001010100
interleave(0b111, 0b000, 0b111) = 0b101101101
```

### Availability Formulas

#### Tile and Content Availability Formulas

Both tile and content availability are stored in a bitstream with the same structure, so these formulas apply equally well to both

| Quantity | Formula | Description |
| -------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `lengthBits` | `(N^subtreeLevels - 1)/(N - 1)` | Length of buffer is determined by subtree levels |
| `lengthBytes` | `ceil(lengthBits / 8)` | Bytes needed to store the buffer | 
| `parent.index` | `floor((child.index - 1) / N)` | Index of the parent in the bitstream | 
| `parent.indexOf(child)` | `(child.index - 1) % N` | Index of the child within the parent's `N` children |
| `parent.children[k].index` | `N * index + k + 1` | Find the bit of the `k-th` child of a node |
| `index` | `(N^level - 1)/(N - 1) + mortonIndex` | Find the index of a node from `(level, mortonIndex)`
| `level` | `ceil(log(index + 1)/log(N))` | Find the level of a node relative to the subtree |
| `globalLevel` | `level + subtreeRoot.globalLevel` | Find the level of a node relative to the entire tileset | 

> | `startOfLevel` | `(N^level - 1)/(N - 1)` | first index at a particular level (relative to the subtree root) |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `startOfLevel` | `(N^level - 1)/(N - 1)` | First index at a particular level (relative to the subtree root) |
```

| `mortonIndex` | `index - startOfLevel` | Convert from bit index to Morton index, relative to the root of the subtree |
| `globalMortonIndex` | `concat(subtreeRoot.globalMortonIndex, mortonIndex)` | Get the Morton index relative to the root of the tileset |

#### Child Subtree Availability Formulas

| Quantity | Formula | Description |
| -------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `lengthBits` | `N^subtreeLevels` | Length of the buffer by subtree levels |
| `lengthBytes` | `ceil(lengthBits / 8)` | Bytes needed to store the buffer |
| `childSubtree.globalLevel` | `subtreeRoot.globalLevel + subtreeLevels` | Level of the child subtrees relative to the tileset root |

> | `leaf.children[k].index` | `N * leaf.mortonIndex + k` | index of the `k-th` child subtree |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `leaf.children[k].index` | `N * leaf.mortonIndex + k` | Index of the `k-th` child subtree |
```

![Content Availability](figures/content-availability.jpg)

The purpose of content availability is to check if a content 3D model exists before making a network request. If content is marked as unavailable, the network request for that file must be skipped.

If content availability is 1 its corresponding tile availability must also be 1. Otherwise, it would be possible to specify content files that are not reachable by the tiles of the tileset. 

If content availability is 0 and its corresponding tile availability is 1 then the tile is considered to be an empty tile.

When a subtree has at least one tile with content, content availability is required. If no tile in the subtree has content, then content availability is disallowed.

### Child Subtree Availability

**Child subtree availability** is a bitstream that determines which subtrees can be reached from the deepest level of this subtree.

> The child subtree availability bitstream has slightly different structure than tile or content availability. There is one bit for each node in the level of the tree immediately below the subtree. That is, if the deepest subtree is level `L`, then there is one bit for every node at level `L + 1`. Since each node at level `L` has `N` children (4 for `QUADTREE` or 8 for `OCTREE`), there are `N * (L + 1)` bits in the child subtree availability bitstream. A 1 bit means there is a child subtree available at that position in the tree. A 0 bit means there is no subtree available at that position.

Reviewer 3: * `That is, if the deepest subtree`. Should it be `deepest subtree node`?
* I assume `L` is a level local to the subtree, but it could be read as a global level.
* The equation `N * (L + 1)` should be `N ^ (L + 1)`.
* No mention of morton encoding
 
I feel like this paragraph would be more clear if defined in terms of `subtreeLevels`

OUTLINE:
- bit vector (describe this like in Cesium 3D Metadata spec?)
- `constant` can be used to save memory
- 1 indicates something is available, 0 indicates unavailable
- meaning depends on type of availability buffers
  - tile availability: does the tile exist?
  - content availability: does the tile have content
  - subtree availability: preview of immediate children availability so traversals can short-circuit
- diagram: tile and content availability
- diagram: subtree availability

### Tile Availability

Tile availability describes what tiles exist at a specific position in space. Though template URIs can represent any possible `(level, x, y)` or `(level, x, y, z)` tile (depending on the tiling scheme), a tileset will typically need only a small subset of the possible tiles. Tile availability explicitly list which tiles are present. This allows querying for tiles while keeping network requests to a minimum.

Tile availability is a bit vector with one bit per node in the [subtree](#subtrees).

Useful formulas for the tile availability buffer:

| Quantity | Formula | Description |
| -------- | ------- | ----------- |

> | `lengthBits` | `N^subtreeLevels - 1` | Length of buffer is determined by subtree levels 

Author: Incorrect, this should be `(N^subtreeLevels - 1) / (N - 1)`

| `lengthBytes` | `ceil(lengthBits / 8)` | Bytes needed to store the buffer | 
| `parent.index` | `floor((child.index - 1) / N)` | Index of the parent in the bit vector | 
| `parent.indexOf(child)` | `(child.index - 1) % N` | Index of the child within the parent's `N` children |
| `parent.children[k].index` | `N * index + k + 1` | Find the bit of the `k-th` child of a node |

> | `index` | `N^level - 1 + mortonIndex` | Find the index of a node from `(level, mortonIndex)`

Author: I need to double check these formulae involving N^level.
